#summary The Universal Disk Image Format

Please refer to the [http://web.archive.org/web/20060308055210/http://www.a2central.com/programming/filetypes/ftne00130.html documentation] for any ambiguities.


Universal Disk Images (.2mg or .2img) consist of a 64-byte header, disk image data.  An optional comment chunk and creator-specific chunk (in that order) may be present after the image data.

All values are stored in little endian format.

|| *Name* || *Offset* || *Size* ||
||  magic_code || $00 || 4 bytes ||
|| creator_code || $04  || 4 bytes ||
|| header_length || $08 || 2 bytes ||
|| version || $0A || 2 bytes ||
|| format || $0c || 4 bytes ||
|| flags || $10 || 4 bytes ||
|| blocks || $14 || 4 bytes ||
|| data_offset || $18 || 4 bytes ||
|| data_length || $1c || 4 bytes ||
|| comment_offset || $20 || 4 bytes ||
|| comment_length || $24 || 4 bytes ||
|| creator_offset || $28 || 4 bytes ||
|| creator_length || $2c || 4 bytes ||
|| reserved || $30 || 16 bytes ||


== magic_code ==

This is the string '2IMG'.

==  creator_code ==
This is a four-character tag which identifies the file creator.  Currently know values are:

|| *Application* || *Code* ||
|| Bernie ][ the Rescue || B2TR ||
|| Catakig || CTKG ||
|| Sheppy's ImageMaker || ShIm ||
|| Sweet 16 || WOOF ||
|| ProFUSE || PRFS ||

== header_length ==
This is the length of the header.  Although the documentation specifies 52 (which excludes reserved bytes), some files are known to use 64.

== version ==
The version number of the image file.  This should be 1.

== image_format==
The image data format.  Valid values are:

|| *Format* || *Value* ||
|| DOS 3.3 Order || 0 ||
|| ProDOS Order || 1 ||
|| Nibblized data || 2 ||

== flags ==
Bit flags pertaining to the disk image.  Undefined fields must be set to 0.

|| *Bit* || *Description* ||
|| 31 || If this bit is set, the disk is locked. ||
|| 8 || If this bit is set, bits 0--7 are valid.  If this bit is not set, a <br> volume number of 254 should be assumed  || 
|| 0--7 || The DOS 3.3 volume number (0--254).  Only valid if bit 8 is set ||

== blocks ==
The number of 512-byte blocks in the disk image.  For Non-ProDOS Order disk images, this field should be 0.

==data_offset==
Offset to the first byte of the image data.  The image data must come before the comment data and the creator data (if present).

== data_length ==
Length of the image data in bytes.  For ProDOS Order disk image, this should be blocks * 512.

==comment_offset==
Offset to the first byte of the comment data.  May be 0 if there is no comment. 

==comment_length ==
Length of the comment data.  May be 0 if there is no comment.

==creator_offset==
Offset to the first byte of the creator-specific data.  May be 0 if there is no creator-specific data. 

==creator_length ==
Length of the creator-specific data.  May be 0 if there is no creator-specific data.